## Overview
The code in this repository shows different ways to produce a full join between two datasets.  A full join returns rows between the two tables that satisfy the join condition in addition to any unmatched rows from either table.  There are three pieces of code in this repository:  
1) <b>Generatedata.sas</b>: Simulates data  for SQLfulljoin.sas and fulljoinhash.sas  
2) <b>fulljoinhash.sas</b>: Uses hash objects within the SAS data step to perform a full join.  Programmatically, the full join is vastly different than inner and left join since program has to track the rows which existed in the right table but did not exist in the left table, and vice versa. This will result in loading the ‘right’ table into memory twice.
3) <b>SQLfulljoin.sas</b>:  Performs a full join using PROC SQL.
<b>My recommendation</b> is to try the hash method on your data.  I believe in most cases you will see <b>great</b> improvements over any other type of join available in SAS.
## What about PROC DS2 and full joins using hash objects?
PROC DS2 can perform joins using hash objects.  The primary advantage of PROC DS2 is it can distribute the work across multiple threads, whereas the data step runs on a single thread.  The multi-threaded method is typically faster than its single threaded counterpart.  
PROC DS2 will partition the ‘left’ table across each thread. Each thread has its own set of unique rows, and threads <b>do not</b> communicate with each other.  That is, the data manipulation tasks must be calculated independent of data on other threads.  Lastly, each thread has its own full copy of the hash object in memory. 
Full joins have an extra constraint that left and inner joins do not – the program must keep track of the keys that existed in the right table that do not exist in the left table, and vice versa.  Since each thread has its own unique partition of the left data and a full in-memory copy of the hash object, the threads are unable to track what rows exist in the right but not the left.  This results from the fact that threads do not communicate with each other.  Therefore, if we changed the number of threads in our DS2 program – we would get different results.
To my knowledge a full join is not possible using PROC DS2 and more than one thread with hash objects.
